Right.
NOTE CONF
Oops.
So that was the theme from Crash Bandicoot three.
NOTE CONF
Uh, maybe some of you played that in your youth.
Um.
NOTE CONF
On PlayStation.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Today I am going to talk about, um, higher order
functions today and tomorrow.
NOTE CONF
Higher order functions.
So starting off with um functions map, filter and fold,
NOTE CONF
which are three higher order functions built into Haskell.
So higher order functions I'll tell you what those are
NOTE CONF
in a second.
Um, uh, we're going through rapidly through the, the, the
NOTE CONF
main things in Haskell that I want to teach you
in this course.
NOTE CONF
So we've done lists and list comprehensions.
We've done recursion.
NOTE CONF
Now higher order functions this week, next week I'll, um,
progress to, um, Algebraic data types and expression trees.
NOTE CONF
And those are kind of the kernel things that I
want to teach.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to be going on beyond that and talking
about other things, um, you know, various themes and, you
NOTE CONF
know, ways of doing things in Haskell.
But, um, these are kind of the main things that
NOTE CONF
are going to be, um, coming up that you should
get under your belt.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So map builder and map filter and fold.
NOTE CONF
So higher order functions.
The introduction I'm going to be showing you a bunch
NOTE CONF
of functions.
And then uh extracting patterns from these functions.
NOTE CONF
And one of the things you can do with higher
order functions is to um, express patterns of computation in,
NOTE CONF
in single functions and then instantiate these, these patterns of
computation, um, to get various functions, which are the ones
NOTE CONF
you actually want.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
I'll explain that via examples.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to start with um, map, which is
um, the name of a higher order function in Haskell
NOTE CONF
that I'll come to in a second.
And I'll start by showing you a bunch of similar
NOTE CONF
programs that you've seen before, or maybe not seen before,
but they're like ones you've seen before.
NOTE CONF
So the first one is this function squares, which squares
all of the integers in the list.
NOTE CONF
And you've seen two ways of writing it.
Um, one is using list comprehension like this.
NOTE CONF
And the other one is using recursion like this okay.
Very simple programs.
NOTE CONF
Um, so uh, so those compute the same function.
And for example applying squares to this list of numbers,
NOTE CONF
you get that result.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So squaring all the numbers in a list um here
is a function that you haven't seen called ords.
NOTE CONF
It uh, it takes a list of characters and produces
a list of character codes.
NOTE CONF
Now, what's a character code?
Um.
NOTE CONF
Okay, just a second.
So, um, every, uh.
NOTE CONF
So we've got this type characters, we've got this type
integers.
NOTE CONF
And, um, you can convert from characters to integers using
a function called ord.
NOTE CONF
And what is it?
What it does is it takes, um, a character like,
NOTE CONF
say, a, and it gives you the, um, the underlying,
um, uh, sort of numerical code for that, for that,
NOTE CONF
uh, for that character, whatever it is.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
You don't have to know what these codes are.
Uh, they're just it just happens that there are numerical
NOTE CONF
codes for each character, not just, you know, the the
normal characters that used to A through Z, you know,
NOTE CONF
one through, well, zero through nine and so forth, all
the, all the punctuation.
NOTE CONF
But there's something called Unicode, which is you can express,
um, all the characters in human language, including, um, you
NOTE CONF
know, Chinese characters and Arabic characters and so forth.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, uh, so there's an awful lot of, uh,
character codes, um, and an awful lot of characters.
NOTE CONF
So this is a way of converting and the way
that these, um, the way that these happen to be
NOTE CONF
arranged, the only thing that's really interesting about them is
that, um, uh, if you've got, you know, you've got
NOTE CONF
letters A through Z, you know, A is less than
B, is less than C is less than D, and
NOTE CONF
so forth.
The character code for A is less than the character
NOTE CONF
code for B and so forth.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So the the character codes kind of mirror the order
of the, of the letters in the alphabet and the,
NOTE CONF
and the digits, um, and so forth.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
That's the only thing you really that really matters.
Okay, so anyway, there's this function.
NOTE CONF
It happens to be used in this example, which is
the only reason I'm really telling you about it.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, and there happens to be another function that
goes the other direction called um chr.
NOTE CONF
So given a character code, you can get a character.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this happens to be this is used in this
example.
NOTE CONF
Let me switch back both screens to that example.
So um, given a list of characters or a string
NOTE CONF
like this, you can compute the list of all the
character codes of the characters in that string in order.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So um, as I said, A is 90 converts to
NOTE CONF
97, um, and so forth.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is done with this list comprehension by applying
the function ord to everything in the list.
NOTE CONF
And you can do it using recursion okay.
Or it's applied to the empty list as the empty
NOTE CONF
list.
Or it's to apply to a list with at least
NOTE CONF
one element in it gives you all of that element,
and then the odds of the rest of the list.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so you've seen you know, it's very similar to
um, to, to to um, to square.
NOTE CONF
And in fact, if I kind of rapidly sort of
go back and forth between these two definitions, okay, it's
NOTE CONF
kind of hard to read that when I'm doing it.
But the difference between these two definitions, sorry, is, um,
NOTE CONF
you know, they've both got a base case of the
empty of the empty list is equal to the empty
NOTE CONF
list.
And in the case of the non-empty list, uh, sorry,
NOTE CONF
I keep messing up.
Um, in case of the non-empty list, the function that's
NOTE CONF
there's a function applied and it's, you know, ah, I
keep going the wrong way.
NOTE CONF
So it's ordered in this case.
And it's, and it's, you know, x times x in
NOTE CONF
this case okay.
In the recursive in the recursive case also x times
NOTE CONF
x or ord okay.
So generalising we've got A function that, um, you know,
NOTE CONF
in the empty in the case of the empty list,
it produces the empty list as a result.
NOTE CONF
And then in the case of the non-empty list, it
applies a function.
NOTE CONF
In my first example, squaring in the second example ord
to all to each of the elements okay, before going
NOTE CONF
on to the next one.
And so this is a function that's built in and
NOTE CONF
it's called map built into Haskell.
It's in the Haskell prelude okay.
NOTE CONF
Called map um and I this is a higher order
function.
NOTE CONF
The reason I call it a higher order function is
because it has um.
NOTE CONF
It has a function as argument.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
You're not just so far we've been applying functions to
integers and characters and strings and lists and and things
NOTE CONF
like that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This function map takes a function as an argument.
So a function from A to B Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Which means that the type of of map, looking at
NOTE CONF
the whole type it has, I'm calling this a sort
of nested.
NOTE CONF
It's got nested arrows.
So you haven't just got the arrows between the arguments.
NOTE CONF
First argument, second argument, result.
You know, not just these two arrows, but you've got
NOTE CONF
an arrow inside the type of one of the arguments.
This is why it's called a higher order function.
NOTE CONF
You can look at the previous functions we've been going
going through.
NOTE CONF
And these are these all these all have just um,
you know, arrows between um, uh, arguments and results, sometimes
NOTE CONF
more than one argument.
But, um, okay, here's a, here's an argument that itself
NOTE CONF
has a, has a function is a function with an
arrow in it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So functional programming is what I'm telling you is what
NOTE CONF
I'm teaching you here.
And and one of the aspects of functional programming is
NOTE CONF
that functions are the kind of main thing that we're
that are of interest.
NOTE CONF
And another reason why it's called functional programming is it
functions are used as data or can be used as
NOTE CONF
data, which is what's going on here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So function a function is used as a normal value
just like integers and strings and so forth.
NOTE CONF
And you can pass them around as, as arguments of
functions, also as results of functions as you'll see later.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, and not just simple functions like a from A
NOTE CONF
to B, but more complex functions.
And this gives you surprising power, it turns out.
NOTE CONF
So, um, uh, this is a definition of map.
You can write it in two ways.
NOTE CONF
Um, this is a function written using list comprehension.
And this is a function definition written using recursion and
NOTE CONF
the function.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So um, map uh takes two arguments.
First the function that it's going to apply to every
NOTE CONF
element in the list and then the the list that
you're wanting to apply that function to all the elements
NOTE CONF
of.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And then it proceeds, as you'd expect, applying the function
here, uh, to each element in the list.
NOTE CONF
Or for the recursive definition, um, applying the function first
to the first thing in the list and then applying
NOTE CONF
it, uh, recursively to everything else in the list.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, in the case of, uh, no, I just I
won't say what I was going to say.
NOTE CONF
Um, um, so I can now use this to define
squares in a new way.
NOTE CONF
I mean, the point was that this is basically the
same definition as these previous two, accept generalised.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we've we've extracted the pattern and written it down
NOTE CONF
in general where the thing that's generalised is the function
that we're applying.
NOTE CONF
And so I can use this now to, to write
a new definition of squares, exactly the same result as
NOTE CONF
the previous ones.
Uh, so um, and I define it using map.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
There's map being applied and I apply it to a
NOTE CONF
function and to the list that I want to get
the squares of.
NOTE CONF
And the function I define here as a helper function.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um square of x is x times x.
And so to get the squares of x is I
NOTE CONF
apply map to this function square and the list that
I want to get the squares of okay.
NOTE CONF
And that gives exactly the same result as these other
two definitions.
NOTE CONF
Is that is that clear?
I think it's pretty easy to see.
NOTE CONF
But if there's a question.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
I'll just square it.
Maybe I'll let you have this.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
If you took out the map and just put squares
axis instead and then we're square x equals x times
NOTE CONF
x, would it still work?
Okay, uh, if I understand what you, what you just
NOTE CONF
said you want to apply square to X is okay.
It has the wrong type is the problem.
NOTE CONF
Um, so square has type into arrow int.
And so if you apply it to a list of
NOTE CONF
integers it will have the wrong type.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Other questions.
No.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um so that's my first example.
NOTE CONF
This is a commonly used, um, higher order function.
Um, uh uh, you know, just showing how it works.
NOTE CONF
Applied, applied to this, uh, to this square, uh, function
for squaring numbers.
NOTE CONF
We, um, you know, we could take this definition of
it, expand it, and we can see that it's doing
NOTE CONF
what we wanted to do.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
The main point here, if you would compare this with
the with the computation sequence for the squares function, the
NOTE CONF
only difference is that we're, um, that we're, uh, you
know, taking the function f here, which is, uh, which
NOTE CONF
is instantiated with this function square here.
And instead of uh, and that's what's showing up in,
NOTE CONF
in each of the, um, you know, as a result
of the application.
NOTE CONF
Um, yeah.
You know, it's applied to each of these, each of
NOTE CONF
these values.
So, um, I'll just flash this up on the screen.
NOTE CONF
This is the recursive definition.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Uh, the computation sequence.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And ord or it is the same sort of idea
ords.
NOTE CONF
You get that ords function here by um.
Instantiating or applying map to the Ord function where Ord
NOTE CONF
is this function here?
That's, uh, that I explained.
NOTE CONF
It's being used to, um, convert a character to its
character code.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, in this case, in this case, the function ord
NOTE CONF
is is already defined.
So I don't have to define it myself using where
NOTE CONF
okay.
So this is this is the only big difference here
NOTE CONF
between this definition okay.
Applying the map to the existing function ord.
NOTE CONF
Whereas here we had to define it using a helper
function.
NOTE CONF
And these functions, by the way, these can be complex
functions.
NOTE CONF
These these are these happen to be my examples happen
to be very simple little functions.
NOTE CONF
They can be complicated functions as complicated as you want
them to be.
NOTE CONF
Um doing lots of computation.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Let me carry on to the next example.
This is called filter.
NOTE CONF
And this is another common pattern of computation and another
function that's built into Haskell.
NOTE CONF
Um, it's the idea of, uh, extracting, um, things from
a list that satisfy a predicate.
NOTE CONF
So here we've got, um, a function you've seen already
called odds.
NOTE CONF
It takes the odd numbers of a list.
So you've seen this, both the, um, definition using um,
NOTE CONF
list comprehension and the definition using recursion.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So um, and it's done using a guard.
So for each x drawn from XZ.
NOTE CONF
If it's odd, then we include it in the result.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And here was the definition using um recursion where the
guard is used in a case analysis.
NOTE CONF
Um, in the, you know, in the second in the
second equation here.
NOTE CONF
All right.
You remember that.
NOTE CONF
So that's all the odd numbers of a list using
a guard to uh, to, to um, uh, pick out
NOTE CONF
the ones that are odd and odd is a built
in function.
NOTE CONF
Um, here is a function which takes, um, a list
of, uh, characters, and it returns the ones that are
NOTE CONF
digits.
Those are the numerical digits.
NOTE CONF
And so, for example, if you apply it to this
string, um, a to C three, it gives you two
NOTE CONF
and three because a and C are not digits.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And this uses, uh, again, it's a list comprehension definition
here.
NOTE CONF
And it's using is digit, which is a built in
function in the library that I think you already saw
NOTE CONF
in your tutorial exercise.
Um.
NOTE CONF
It's using that to um, to, to pick out the
ones that are digits.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we return x drawn from xz such that is
NOTE CONF
digit of x is true.
And we return the list of those.
NOTE CONF
So it's it's removing the ones that are not digits.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So two examples here.
And I could show you another ten.
NOTE CONF
But by now you're bored and you're thinking please can
we just finally have a higher order function that expresses
NOTE CONF
this, um, pattern of computation?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And the answer is yes you can.
It's called filter.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So it's it's a generalisation.
NOTE CONF
Going back to these two examples.
What's changing here is the highlighted thing.
NOTE CONF
Basically it's a it's a pattern of computation where you're
going through a list and and filtering out the the
NOTE CONF
values that satisfy a predicate, a predicate a predicate is
a function from a type to booleans.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You've seen this in um, computation and logic.
NOTE CONF
This this um terminology.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we supply uh, an arbitrary predicate called p here
of type a arrow bool okay.
NOTE CONF
A can be any type.
It's the type.
NOTE CONF
It's the type of the things in the list that
we want to filter okay.
NOTE CONF
And we use that predicate in the guard here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we're looking for all the things x drawn from
XZ such that p of x is produces true.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So the guard the sorry the predicate could be um,
NOTE CONF
well the predicate could be odd.
Like this as we had in our example.
NOTE CONF
Or it could be um, is digit as we had
in the other example.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That was a little bit fast.
NOTE CONF
Let me just back up.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
The definition of filter.
Again higher order function.
NOTE CONF
Because we've got a a function as the first argument
here.
NOTE CONF
It's got an arrow in its type filter is defined.
Uh here are two ways of defining filter using um
NOTE CONF
list comprehension and recursion.
And, um, it's exactly the same program as you've seen
NOTE CONF
here, except that we've generalised by, um, uh, generalising odd
and is digit to um, this predicate P.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Is that clear?
NOTE CONF
Um, and so this is this is odds defined, uh,
three ways recursive list comprehension recursion and um, using filter
NOTE CONF
this higher order function filter.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And likewise um digits defined three ways list comprehension recursion
and using the higher order function filter.
NOTE CONF
And as I said this predicate can be as complicated
as you want.
NOTE CONF
Uh, only important thing is it has to produce bool
as a result.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so, um, you could, uh, filter, uh, the, um,
you know, the prime numbers from a list or, uh,
NOTE CONF
anything you want.
Yeah, whatever.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so those are two examples so far of, um,
higher order functions that are built into Haskell, commonly used
NOTE CONF
higher order functions.
You can use them in your programs to make them
NOTE CONF
often simpler.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, you know, because this pattern arises so often and
instantiate is just a matter of, of of invoking these
NOTE CONF
functions map or filter and, um, and coming up with
the, with the, with the predicate or the function that
NOTE CONF
you want to apply them to.
Yep.
NOTE CONF
Why?
Why is sorry.
NOTE CONF
Why does it rather than integer it returns a list
of characters.
NOTE CONF
You mean the digits function Yeah.
Digits takes a list of characters to list of characters,
NOTE CONF
because it takes a list of characters.
And it and it removes all the ones that are
NOTE CONF
not digits and produces a list of characters, which is
the ones remaining.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Or that is to say, it picks out the ones
NOTE CONF
that are digits.
The digits are our characters.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The character, you know, one or 2 or 3 or
NOTE CONF
whatever.
It's a character.
NOTE CONF
It's not the number.
Okay, that's that's the thing.
NOTE CONF
All right?
There's no automatic conversion between between, um, digits, which are
NOTE CONF
characters and numbers for adding in things.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, of course you can convert.
Um, there's a function called, uh, I forget, which does
NOTE CONF
it?
I think you used it in your tutorial exercise, I
NOTE CONF
don't remember.
Um, anyway, there's a way to convert from strings to
NOTE CONF
to to numbers.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And it it only works if the string has digits,
only digits in it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
Other questions?
I want to now go to the next example.
NOTE CONF
And it's the last example I want to show you.
It's a bit trickier to understand.
NOTE CONF
It's more complicated okay.
It's called fold.
NOTE CONF
And here I'm going to show you a bunch of
functions um again that display this pattern of computation.
NOTE CONF
So the first one is some, uh, some you've seen
before.
NOTE CONF
It adds together, um, a list of numbers.
These ones happen to be in order.
NOTE CONF
They don't have to be in order.
Um, so the sum of these, this list of numbers
NOTE CONF
is ten.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And what it does is it starts it's a it's
a recursive definition here.
NOTE CONF
You can't define it using list comprehension because the result
is not a list.
NOTE CONF
Um, so it it takes a list of numbers.
If there are no numbers in the list, result is
NOTE CONF
zero.
If there's at least one number in the list, it
NOTE CONF
adds that number to the sum of the rest of
the numbers.
NOTE CONF
Okay, you've seen this definition already.
And you remember why this is a zero here.
NOTE CONF
Instead of seven or some other number.
Identity.
NOTE CONF
Right.
It's the it's the identity of the.
NOTE CONF
Of the of the operation plus.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And that's the reason why it's kind of the right
answer.
NOTE CONF
Um, you know, it's perfectly possible to define a function
like somewhere where it isn't zero, where, you know, it
NOTE CONF
would automatically add 17 to the sum of a list,
but that would probably not be what you want.
NOTE CONF
Okay, but it would work.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Product is similar.
Instead of adding together the numbers in a list, we
NOTE CONF
multiply the numbers in a list.
And so the operation we use to put together the
NOTE CONF
each number with the with the recursive call to the
product of the rest of the list is the multiplication
NOTE CONF
operation multiplication function.
Remember these these things here used um, you know, to
NOTE CONF
multiply or to add.
These are also functions, of course.
NOTE CONF
Um, the only thing that's special about them is that
they're written using, um, written using kind of, uh, symbols
NOTE CONF
rather than, uh, spelled out, um, alphabetically.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Another another thing that's special about them is that they
happen to be built into the computer operations.
NOTE CONF
Um, so, uh, you know, so they're they're already there.
But, um, anyway, um, so again, the, uh, the, the,
NOTE CONF
the value here that we start with in case the
list is is empty is again the the identity element
NOTE CONF
for multiplication.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Product of the empty list is one okay.
Which seems a bit odd when you start, but otherwise,
NOTE CONF
um, well, first of all, uh, because it's the identity
element and that means that, you know, if it was
NOTE CONF
zero, which, which would be the other obvious thing to
write here, then the product of any list would be
NOTE CONF
zero, because it would be zero times all the things
in the list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, three more examples.
NOTE CONF
This because this one's a little bit more complicated.
I want to show you five examples instead of two.
NOTE CONF
So this is a function and it's built into Haskell
is called concat which is short for concatenate.
NOTE CONF
Concatenate is a word you may not have come across,
but it's a kind of computer science jargon word meaning,
NOTE CONF
uh, Putting together a bunch of a bunch of strings
or sequences or something like that, end to end.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so example being like here we've got concat applied
to a list of strings and it just joins together
NOTE CONF
all the strings in this list, one after the other
concat and eight okay.
NOTE CONF
To get that result.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is showing what it does.
Here's another example on lists of numbers.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Works for any kind of lists that is to say
NOTE CONF
lists of lists.
And here's the type.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It takes a a list of lists.
NOTE CONF
And it gives you a list of the same kind
of elements as were in each of the lists in
NOTE CONF
the list of lists.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
If you understand what I mean.
So so you've got a list of strings here.
NOTE CONF
And it gives you a string or a list of
lists of numbers.
NOTE CONF
And it gives you a list of numbers.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Clear.
So this is built in in Haskell happens to be
NOTE CONF
built in because it's so useful.
And it, um, what it does is, uh, again, in
NOTE CONF
the case of the empty list.
Well, not again, in the case of the empty list,
NOTE CONF
it gives you the empty list as a result.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Because there's nothing to join together.
So the result has to be a list.
NOTE CONF
And so it's the empty list.
And, um, the function that's used to, to combine the
NOTE CONF
first element in the list with the recursive call of
concatenating everything else in the list is this function called
NOTE CONF
append that I introduced some lectures ago okay.
Plus plus it means you know like if you if
NOTE CONF
you apply it to con and cat it would give
you concat just joining two strings end to end.
NOTE CONF
And so this is kind of the generalisation.
Concat is kind of the generalisation of append to a
NOTE CONF
to a list of lists.
Okay, again.
NOTE CONF
You know why is.
Why is the the result in the case of, um,
NOTE CONF
the empty list?
Why is it the empty list?
NOTE CONF
You know, it's because the empty list is the identity
element for append.
NOTE CONF
Empty list.
Append.
NOTE CONF
Anything is whatever the anything is.
Okay, so this is what you have to start off
NOTE CONF
with.
Oops.
NOTE CONF
This is what you have to start off with to
make this recursive definition work.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
Is that clear?
NOTE CONF
I'll just mention here the, um, I said already that
it's common when you've got a list that you use
NOTE CONF
a variable name, it's not required, but it's common to
use a variable name with an s at the end.
NOTE CONF
Plural.
And you pronounce it x is okay.
NOTE CONF
You've got a list of x's.
So the things in the list you call X and
NOTE CONF
um, and the and the and the whole list is,
is, is a list of X's.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
When you've got a list of lists like here okay.
NOTE CONF
This is a list of lists then um, you kind
of do that again.
NOTE CONF
And so it's a it's got two S's at the
end and it's pronounced it's pronounced x's.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So um, this is, this is only a little, um,
NOTE CONF
helpful, uh, convention to make it easy to see in
your program what the lists are and what the lists
NOTE CONF
of lists are and so forth.
And of course, you could use more X's if more
NOTE CONF
S's, if you've got lists of lists of lists.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So three examples so far.
Here's another two.
NOTE CONF
Quickly the uh and applied to a list of booleans.
You've seen this already.
NOTE CONF
You've used it in your computation and logic tutorial.
So and applied to a list of truth values produces
NOTE CONF
true only if all the truth values are true.
And it's defined like this.
NOTE CONF
And here's the, um, you know, takes a list of
bull to a bull.
NOTE CONF
Um, here's the, uh, conjunction being applied to combine the
results and the, um, the the starting value is true
NOTE CONF
because true is the identity for conjunction and or, uh,
you know, similarly disjunction and identity.
NOTE CONF
False.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So you're familiar with these functions.
I don't know if you saw the definitions, but anyway,
NOTE CONF
there they are.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So.
We've got a pattern.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You've seen five examples.
NOTE CONF
Um, the pattern I've highlighted the things that are changing
in the pattern.
NOTE CONF
There's the there's the result that you, uh, produce in
the case where the list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Well, first of all, you're taking a list of things
NOTE CONF
and producing a result.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
In the case the list is empty, you produce a
value, but the value produce is different in each of
NOTE CONF
these cases.
Zero one empty list.
NOTE CONF
True false okay.
And and you're combining you're doing a recursive call combining
NOTE CONF
the first thing in the list with the recursive call
of everything else.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And the operation that you're using here is different in
NOTE CONF
each case.
You know, plus times um append conjunction disjunction.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So um, abstracting this up, an extract by abstracting this
NOTE CONF
to a pattern of computation, you know, you're going to
have to supply two things because there are two things
NOTE CONF
that keep changing.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
There's the there's the sort of starting value and there's
the operation you're using for combining things.
NOTE CONF
And so um, this pattern is um called fold and
um, it's, uh, it's built into Haskell and the function
NOTE CONF
is a little bit more the definition is a little
bit more complicated, but anyway, it's a higher order function.
NOTE CONF
And here is the, uh, the functional, uh, the function
being used as a, as a first argument here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But it's got, as I said, it takes two arguments
NOTE CONF
in order to, you know, if you want to instantiate
it, you need to give it two arguments.
NOTE CONF
You need to give the function and you need to
give it the starting value.
NOTE CONF
And so the function.
Is called f.
NOTE CONF
Here the starting value is called v okay.
In case the list okay.
NOTE CONF
The result here is you know, you give it a
list and it gives you a result of the same
NOTE CONF
type as the things in the list.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, if the list is empty the result is V
okay.
NOTE CONF
The starting value.
This is the second parameter here.
NOTE CONF
It's that same v okay.
If the list is not empty then you apply f.
NOTE CONF
It's a it's an argument.
It's a list with two arguments.
NOTE CONF
You apply f to that element x and to the
recursive call of applying fold to f and v.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And the rest of the list okay.
NOTE CONF
So we've got a pattern.
We instantiate it by supplying a binary function f and
NOTE CONF
a value.
Usually the value, as I've shown in these examples is
NOTE CONF
the identity value for the function.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Identity meaning you know v applying f to v and
whatever it is gives the same result as v, which
NOTE CONF
is the same as applying f to um v and
that entity value.
NOTE CONF
Its left and right identity is the name of that
in mathematics.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so this is a little bit more complicated.
So I'm going to spend a little bit more time
NOTE CONF
explaining this.
Um, and one uh, one thing that might help because
NOTE CONF
the functions that I'm using here are always infix functions.
If you look at them.
NOTE CONF
Okay, it might help to write this using infix function.
So I'm taking exactly this definition.
NOTE CONF
And I'm just changing it by writing the the the
right hand side of this second equation with f as
NOTE CONF
an infix function.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
I can make any, any kind of, um, you know,
function written using letters into infix by putting these like
NOTE CONF
backticks around around the name.
Right?
NOTE CONF
So that's what I've done here.
It's the same function.
NOTE CONF
I'm just using it as an infix, meaning that I
put the arguments, you know, to the left and to
NOTE CONF
the right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But that's exactly the same expression as I had a
second ago where F was, you know, use f, and
NOTE CONF
then you give the first argument, you give the second
argument.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So it's just a notational thing okay.
NOTE CONF
But it helps to explain what I'm doing here.
And let me show you.
NOTE CONF
How that works.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Using my using my example.
So some if I apply some to A1 up to
NOTE CONF
an.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
What's that.
It's A1 Plus.
NOTE CONF
Dot dot dot up to a n plus zero.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
The zero is the is what I you know I
go with recursion down this list and then eventually I
NOTE CONF
get to the end.
And that's where the zero comes from.
NOTE CONF
And then I'm adding these.
I'm adding these up okay.
NOTE CONF
Product.
Is similar but it uses multiplication.
NOTE CONF
Um concat.
Is similar but it's using append.
NOTE CONF
Do you see that in the back?
I hope so.
NOTE CONF
Um.
And.
NOTE CONF
And or.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Five examples.
So, I mean, the the pattern is obvious when I
NOTE CONF
write them down like this.
Um, so this is, this is not the definition.
NOTE CONF
This is what the definition gives you as a, um,
you know, for, for a list of length n, okay.
NOTE CONF
So um, fold apply to F and v and a
list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It's it's.
NOTE CONF
It's exactly the same.
Um.
NOTE CONF
With each one of these operations replaced by f.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
I don't know if that's helpful, but it's helpful for
me anyway.
NOTE CONF
Um, I think it makes it pretty clear.
Um, there's another there's another diagram I want to show
NOTE CONF
you in a minute.
Uh, okay.
NOTE CONF
So I can use going back to my, um, my
code here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I can use fold to define all of these
NOTE CONF
five functions in one in kind of one line.
So, um, so some.
NOTE CONF
Okay, here's a previous definition.
Here's what it does.
NOTE CONF
And you can define it.
Some of X's is just fold um plus zero x
NOTE CONF
is okay.
There's a slight um whoops a slight um, thing you
NOTE CONF
need to remember here, which is that if you want
to use I don't know if this is actually come
NOTE CONF
up, it says recall that.
I don't know if I've actually said this.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But a, um, um, a function which is written using
NOTE CONF
a symbol like plus or times or whatever.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So normally you write that function, um, infix meaning you
provide the arguments left and right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, if you would just write the function a plus
NOTE CONF
here without the parentheses, then Haskell would think you're trying
to add fold or fold to zero.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And it would will give you a give you an
NOTE CONF
error.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
You need to tell Haskell what I mean.
Here is the function, not the function applied to two
NOTE CONF
arguments.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Just a function.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
To get to get the function, you put parentheses around
it okay.
NOTE CONF
Just to Haskell notation you put parentheses around a symbol
to make it to change it from being infix to
NOTE CONF
to normal which is called prefix.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So here's here's what I mean by you know here's
infix.
NOTE CONF
Here's what I just called prefix okay.
Infix um function goes in between the arguments prefix.
NOTE CONF
The the function goes before the argument.
So that's, that's why that's, that's why these parentheses are
NOTE CONF
there.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So anyway sum is fold applied to um plus and
zero.
NOTE CONF
Um and for all the other definitions I can do
exactly the same kind of thing.
NOTE CONF
So for product it's multiplication and one for concat, it's
append and empty list and so forth.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is um, all of these, uh, examples, all
NOTE CONF
of these five examples written using fold.
And um, here's a computation sequence which I'm not going
NOTE CONF
to go through, but it's the same actually.
Sorry, this was the same one you've seen before.
NOTE CONF
Um, for some step by step.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Using the recursive definition.
And if I write it using fold, then um, then
NOTE CONF
uh, it's a little bit longer just because I have
to expand what fold means.
NOTE CONF
Um, but basically I'm doing the same thing.
Thing one plus.
NOTE CONF
Okay, if I'm applying to one and two here, then
in fact, this this last this next to last line
NOTE CONF
here is, um, exactly what I wrote on the piece
of paper a second ago.
NOTE CONF
Okay, first line up there for the case where we've
got A1 and A2.
NOTE CONF
So we're n equals two.
So are there any questions.
NOTE CONF
There is a particular question that I'm hoping somebody will
ask.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
It's like the function also called.
NOTE CONF
Are you just said it I think.
Yeah I mean there is also a function called L
NOTE CONF
and I mean um, I think it works just like,
uh, it takes, uh, the first argument and then adds
NOTE CONF
the list to it.
But is there a difference?
NOTE CONF
Like, can they be different?
I'll explain that.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So the question was about, um, fold l okay.
NOTE CONF
So what I was expecting is a question and it's
kind of it's exactly what you just said, expressed in
NOTE CONF
a different way, is why am I talking about a
function called fold?
NOTE CONF
But writing a function which is written fold r.
And you asked, what about fold L?
NOTE CONF
Okay, there is it turns out there's, there's two functions.
There's fold r and fold L.
NOTE CONF
And what fold are means is to fold a bracketing
to the to the right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, bracketing to the right means.
NOTE CONF
Means that the way this works.
Is like that and so forth.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That's what I mean by bracketing to the right.
NOTE CONF
This is what fold.
This is what fold are does I'm going to stop
NOTE CONF
talking about fold and probably talk about fold.
Ah Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so there's another.
There's another one which has the same type, but it
NOTE CONF
has a different definition which results in, um, I'll just
write it.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
Sorry, f.
NOTE CONF
I'm not sure that that's very clear, because my horrible
handwriting.
NOTE CONF
But it's it's doing the same computation, you know, using
using f everywhere.
NOTE CONF
I should maybe first, um, put the Put Francis in
here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It's it's it's using f to combine all these things
NOTE CONF
with V at the beginning, and the bracketing goes to
the left.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
If if f is associative.
NOTE CONF
And commutative then these are the same.
They give the same result okay.
NOTE CONF
Um if not then they can give different results.
Let me show you a different diagram that might help.
NOTE CONF
Okay a list.
I said a list is always constructed.
NOTE CONF
Using cons and the empty list.
Um.
NOTE CONF
So, um.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Uh, that's a cons.
Okay, so the list, the list a1 cons, a2 cons,
NOTE CONF
etc..
Up to a n cons nil can be written like
NOTE CONF
this.
This is.
NOTE CONF
This is called a tree.
I don't know if you've encountered trees in Julien's lectures
NOTE CONF
yet.
Have you know.
NOTE CONF
Okay, trees in computer science are written upside down.
Okay, so trees in in in nature grow upwards, trees
NOTE CONF
in computer science grow downwards.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And you can use trees to represent expressions.
So we're combining A1 with with.
NOTE CONF
Um with cons with the result of all this which
is A2 combined with cons with all this.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Anyway, I hope you can understand this.
NOTE CONF
This is only an informal explanation.
And so fold our of f of v.
NOTE CONF
It basically takes that picture.
And replaces all of the cons with FS.
NOTE CONF
And the empty list with a V is what's going
on here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And the picture for fold L is different.
NOTE CONF
It's in the book.
Try to figure out yourself well.
NOTE CONF
Try to write the definition yourself and and then try
to figure out what the picture would be.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
My time is almost up.
NOTE CONF
I'll just show you the last thing.
This is just showing how you can combine these functions.
NOTE CONF
And so remember my example, the sum of the squares
of the odd numbers in the list.
NOTE CONF
Um, you can combine, you know, you can write one
one line definition with a helper function, the sum of
NOTE CONF
the square of the of the odd numbers in the
list there.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
Uh, more.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
More higher order functions tomorrow.
NOTE CONF
I just want to ask that.
What's the for our use for like the mean what's
NOTE CONF
what's what.
Fold are what is it?
NOTE CONF
It means fold.
Uh, to the right.
NOTE CONF
Like like what's the purpose of using this?
When when when do we use when do we use
NOTE CONF
it?
Oh, uh.
NOTE CONF
Well, defining things, which, uh, Combine items in the list
together.
NOTE CONF
I mean, you've seen examples, some in product and so
forth.
NOTE CONF
This kind of thing happens all the time.
Like an example would be more complicated with example would
NOTE CONF
be if you want to sort the elements in a
list into into ascending order, you know, you've got a
NOTE CONF
list of numbers, you want to put them.
You want to produce a list which is in all
NOTE CONF
of them in order.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, this is um, fold applied to a function called
insert starting with the empty list.
NOTE CONF
So you insert the elements one at a time into
an empty list.
NOTE CONF
It grows and it always keeps the resulting elements in
order.
NOTE CONF
That's an example.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Lots of times you're putting together stuff in a list
using some sort of operation and building up a result
NOTE CONF
like that.
Okay, that's an example.
NOTE CONF
You'll see them coming up.
Yep.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
Did you have one more?
NOTE CONF
Because I assume that for L is more useful than
for R or.
NOTE CONF
Actually fold R I would say is more often used
because they're equivalent and it's kind of more intuitive how
NOTE CONF
it works.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But um, they're usually equivalent.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Mentioned something about partial computation and it's that you don't
have to put all of the.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Partial partial evaluation.
NOTE CONF
I'll come to that.
It'll be in the next lecture okay.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
I just wanted to ask.
Is there no way to raise the volume?
NOTE CONF
The volume?
Yeah, I would like to I'm going to ask about
NOTE CONF
that because, for example, the music is almost inaudible.
That's what I meant.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
It should be blasting everywhere especially.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
I'll just log myself out.
Give me a second.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
All right.
Hi.
NOTE CONF
I'm not really sure that the purpose of the code
are for the specific application.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So I showed little examples of, um, you know, these
NOTE CONF
five examples.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This this happens more frequently than just these five examples.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So whenever you're, you know, working on a list of
items and you want to combine, you want to build
NOTE CONF
up a result one at a time from from the
elements in the list.
NOTE CONF
Um, it happens all the time.
The result is actually the same.
NOTE CONF
But how?
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
What's the question then?
Fold is fold L in pulled out.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, yeah.
Well, like I said, building up a result in stages
NOTE CONF
from the elements in a list using always the same
operation.
NOTE CONF
The same result Y.
No, no, it's not the same.
NOTE CONF
What do you mean, the same result?
Like after the calculations, they both have got the same
NOTE CONF
result.
You mean fold L and fold are.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So usually it doesn't matter which one you use.
Is that the.
NOTE CONF
Is that the question?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Usually it doesn't matter.
You can you can use either one.
NOTE CONF
It's uh most people use fold.
Ah.
NOTE CONF
Because it's more intuitively Uh, actually, I'm just.
I realise I'm just, uh, broadcasting here.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Hi.
I'm fine.
NOTE CONF
I am.
Is this such thing as.
NOTE CONF